
down vote
accepted
	
Path:  http://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/219655/k-nn-computational-complexity

Assuming k
is fixed (as both of the linked lectures do), then your algorithmic choices will determine whether your computation takes O(nd+kn) runtime or O(ndk)

runtime.

First, let's consider a O(nd+kn)

runtime algorithm:

    Initialize selectedi=0

for all observations i
in the training set
For each training set observation i
, compute disti, the distance from the new observation to training set observation i
For j=1
to k: Loop through all training set observations, selecting the index i with the smallest disti value and for which selectedi=0. Select this observation by setting selectedi=1
.
Return the k

    selected indices

Each distance computation requires O(d)
runtime, so the second step requires O(nd) runtime. For each iterate in the third step, we perform O(n) work by looping through the training set observations, so the step overall requires O(nk) work. The first and fourth steps only require O(n) work, so we get a O(nd+kn)

runtime.

Now, let's consider a O(ndk)

runtime algorithm:

    Initialize selectedi=0

for all observations i
in the training set
For j=1
to k: Loop through all training set observations and compute the distance d between the selected training set observation and the new observation. Select the index i with the smallest d value for which selectedi=0. Select this observation by setting selectedi=1
.
Return the k

    selected indices

For each iterate in the second step, we compute the distance between the new observation and each training set observation, requiring O(nd)
work for an iteration and therefore O(ndk)

work overall.

The difference between the two algorithms is that the first precomputes and stores the distances (requiring O(n)
extra memory), while the second does not. However, given that we already store the entire training set, requiring O(nd) memory, as well as the selected vector, requiring O(n) storage, the storage of the two algorithms is asymptotically the same. As a result, the better asymptotic runtime for k>1

makes the first algorithm more attractive.

It's worth noting that it is possible to obtain an O(nd)

runtime using an algorithmic improvement:

    For each training set observation i

, compute disti, the distance from the new observation to training set observation i
Run the quickselect algorithm to compute the kth
smallest distance in O(n)
runtime
Return all indices no larger than the computed kth

    smallest distance

This approach takes advantage of the fact that efficient approaches exist to find the kth
smallest value in an unsorted array.




Path: http://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/211177/comparison-of-lda-vs-knn-time-complexity

Time complexity depends on the number of data and features.

LDA time complexity is O(Nd2)
if N>d, otherwise it's O(d3)

(see this question and answer). It's mostly contained in the training phase, as you have to find the within class variance.

k-NN time complexity is O(Nd)

. Actually, training without preprocessing is instantaneous (check this book), testing takes most time as you have to compare each test instance to most (or even the whole) training data.

Said that, without any other optmizations, k-NN should run incrementally faster than LDA as you add more dimensions to your problem.

Also, k-NN time complexity is pretty much insensitive to the number of classes in most implementations. LDA on the other hand has a direct dependence on that.




Path: http://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/142565/computational-complexity-for-linear-discriminant-analysis
There are two potential bottlenecks:

    As you pointed out, finding the within-class scatter in step 3 takes N(d+d2)

steps, or O(Nd2)

.

Both the matrix multiplication and eigendecomposition in step 5 take approximately O(d3)
. Depending on the algorithm, matrix multiplication can be a bit faster: there are algorirthms that are ∼O(n2.4)

    and you can also cheat a bit because you don't need to compute every single eigenvector.

The other steps are relatively trivial, so your answer depends on whether N>d
. If you have more features than examples, it's O(d3), otherwise it's O(Nd2)

This paper by Cai, He, and Han walks through the space/time complexity in more detail. Annoyingly, they use m
to mean the number of examples, which you called N, while using N to refer to the number of features, which you call d

, so beware.

The paper also shows a related algorithm that is more time and space efficient. 


Other Links:

https://nlp.stanford.edu/IR-book/html/htmledition/time-complexity-and-optimality-of-knn-1.html

http://machinelearningmastery.com/a-tour-of-machine-learning-algorithms/  - Do read for differences
